---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Artificially Intelligent? or Artificial Intelligence? A full review about AI usage in the classroom"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-04-24
published: true
labels:
  - Artificial Intelligence 
  - Software Engineering
  - How to Prompt AI
  - ChatGPT
---
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become a transformative force in various fields, including education. In the realm of software engineering, AI offers unique opportunities to enhance learning experiences, streamline development processes, and advance the capabilities of developers. As technology continues to evolve, incorporating AI into software engineering education becomes increasingly relevant, empowering students like me with the skills and tools needed to navigate the complexities of modern software development. AI for me specifically has made writing code, debugging, coming up with ideas, and designing much quicker, easier, efficient, and has been crucial to my growth as a Software Developer and has allowed me to be creative while creating things in a timely manner. In ICS 314, AI platforms such as ChatGPT, have played a significant role in the trajectory of my assignments, how long they’ve taken me, and how efficient they are at meeting requirements assigned in our work. 

Throughout my time in this course, I’ve used AI for almost every single assignment, even if I didn’t use it to generate actual code for me. Having ChatGPT to aid in assignments sometimes even just helps as a debugging tool, asking to fix syntax errors, add documentation, and asking it to explain what each part of my code is executing.

Experience WODs 
 For experience practice WODs such as the Browser History series, when attempting to complete the WOD on my own for the first time, I ran into issues with the Browser logos and trying to make them wrap in the text. I also clearly remember having issues with my style.css file and my browser application not being able to import the font properly, even though it was already created for us. For these issues, I would ask ChatGPT prompts such as, “Why isn’t my font loading, even when it’s imported from google fonts into my stylesheet?” with my style.css sheet pasted into the search bar, and for my logo issues, I prompted ChatGPT by asking, “why aren’t my logos properly wrapped to the left side of the text?” followed by the code excerpt, and then followed by another prompt asking, “can you change the file to ensure that my logos are wrapped to the left side of the text?” I remember this specifically worked well, but it made the paragraph double spaced for some reason, so I also followed up by asking it to “fix the double spacing that occurred, make the logo smaller so it is in line with the paragraph sentences, and not taller.”

Practice WODs (In class)
Throughout In-class Practice WODs, I relied on ChatGPT to mainly help me fix errors. During the first few practice WODs, I remember just simply copy pasting the assignment details and requirements into ChatGPT as a whole but I quickly learned that this causes ChatGPT to make more mistakes as the instructions can sometimes be way too much for it to process all at once. I remember attempting this for the Murphys practice mockup and it backfired greatly– while it gave me a great basis (got my background image working, got the navbar) it also created more work for me to do to undo what it programmed since it varied from what I really needed to do. Even when prompting it to add the Bootstrap icons, it would put completely different icons even if I specified which ones to use, and add the social media icons to the middle of the nav bar, not to the far right. Along with the footer, which didn’t appear after asking Chat to add it according to the measurements I wanted. Some prompts I used were, “fix the bootstrap icons, it should be to the far right of the nav bar, not in the middle” and “is there any reason my logo.png isn’t loading even when I added it correctly?” followed by code excerpts to help. As I got more familiar to the practice wod formats, I usually would just ask chat to do one thing at a time. Similarly to Murphys, when we worked on practice mockups for morning brew, my buttons weren’t centered. The background image of the coffee pour wasn’t fully covering the screen, and the information about ordering (the orange buttons) weren’t orange and had the wrong information. For this wod specifically, i asked specific questions like, “is there anything I can do to fix my style sheet so that my buttons take in the orange color instead of being blue?” 


In-class WODs
Similarly to the practice WODs, the actual in class WODs, I used ChatGPT to help me code, and then when issued popped up, I would ask for help in fixing the errors. A lot of the time, the questions included, “Why is ESLint giving me this error? Can I suppress it?,” and “Why did my entire web application disappear after adding this line?” followed by coding excerpts. Questions also included “How can I implement this? _____” or “Make my font this color____” and especially when we got to doing website mockups, aligning the text and adjusting padding was super difficult for me for some reason, so I’d of course ask, “fix the padding for this paragraph, I want more space above it than there is right now. It should be closer to the bottom of the screen” and especially when we got to meteor and react, where we had to do a lot of terminal commands, I would just ask chatgpt “whats the terminal command for mac to install ____” or when switching versions of node or checking for node in general, I would just ask for the command, or when commands returned with errors, I would copy and paste the error into chat and ask for possible reasons why it could be failing. My strategy for the WODs was always to attempt as much as I could on my own and then when I’d run into issues or thought I’d have a difficult time implementing certain requirements with the time left for the WOD, I would rely on Chat to help me. I believe for the 2nd WOD about drifting, ChatGPT actually did the entire thing for me. I remember being really nervous about turning it in because if it turned out to be wrong, I would’ve wasted time I could’ve used. (Spoiler alert, I got the 100!) 

Essays
When writing the essays for this class, I hardly used ChatGPT but only because the prompts are pretty interesting and I enjoy writing essays as it is. If I did use it, I would come up with an idea on my own and then ask chat to create an introduction paragraph that I could build off of. Not only has this been great for this class but honestly in all essays I need to write as well. Sometimes I have lots of ideas to write about but have no idea how to get started, and AI has been great at providing, what I call “outlines.” Kind of like a basis as to what you need to do on your own. 

Final project
I think AI has probably been the biggest help for our final project because of how many frameworks it utilizes, which can be especially confusing when working together with a team. I know for the deployment of our website, we had SO many issues with it and we immediately ran to chatGPT. When we followed the instructions with digital ocean, we had a lot of issues with our mup setup and I would just paste the entire error into chatgpt so it could populate possible reasons why it was failing. It helped us to mitigate the errors for a bit until we did have to fix it through going to office hours, but still, we thought it was helpful. We’ve also been using it to help write our test cases since it can get a bit confusing to implement when we’re all merging at similar times and have to keep updated the tests in multiple files in order for the test cafe to run properly. When I was having issues with mine, I just asked, “are my naming conventions correct? Is there anything else that may be wrong with this?” and it would give me a list of things to try. Additionally, design wise it has been great at making our UI look great, helped me to edit the nav bar, fixed my imports, fixed centering and colors, it even computed everything I needed to add a password hide function to the signup and login using bootstrap! It’s actually funny though, because at first, it used some random image for the eye but i had to follow up telling it to use bootstrap, and then it had the eye outside of the text box, so I also had to fix that by being specific with chat and saying “it needs to be inside of the textbox, to the far right” 

Learning a concept / tutorial
ChatGPT has been great at teaching me CSS and how to quickly change things in my design that are actually simple to do, I just hadn’t really known. Additionally, it has taught me a lot about common errors to check (example, node version) for specific issues that will often pop up when working on a meteor project. I haven’t learned a lot tutorial wise because the class tutorials are pretty great. 

Answering a question in class or in Discord
I will usually ask AI to answer my questions before asking Discord only because I don’t wanna bother people or be embarrassed if it turns out to be something easy. It’s also easier to be “lazier” with questions on ChatGPT than it is on Discord questions because AI can usually fill in the blanks (with the right information) whereas Discord isnt a guaranteed response or requires more information. I don’t use AI for in class questions unless my professor doesn’t know either, which would be unusual. 

Asking or answering a smart-question
I haven’t used AI to answer a smart question from other people because if they wanted to use AI to get an AI answer then they would. I also find that people will probably respond more to “slang” or simple answers rather than ChatGPT adding too much information and words that it actually makes it more difficult to understand. I’ve asked smart-questions to Chat and it has been helpful mostly because the answer is instant and even if it isn’t exactly correct, it helps you to have an idea of what you need to do, and then you can re-prompt it with more follow up questions that are more specific. 

Coding example e.g. “give an example of using Underscore .pluck”
I’ve probably asked ChatGPT for examples for a majority of the assignments, especially if I struggled to understand. I remember asking it for a lot of Bootstrap examples since the API for it is pretty simple, and I wanted to know how else I could implement/customize it for our final project. 

Explaining code
I will usually ask ChatGPT to explain code when I need to duplicate a file or edit a file that was already made by someone else so I can properly understand what it does and avoid errors. For example, we utilized the template for our final project and wanted to use similar concepts from “Digits” but when implementing it, I wanted to know what certain functions did so that when I mocked the file for our project, I wasn’t deleting or using things that I didn’t need. It’s also useful for .json files that can be tricky to understand what the purpose is. 


Writing code
I have made AI write me code for every assignment this semester. For certain things, it is significantly easier for me to copy paste it from AI versus struggling with it.  For example, I’ve asked AI to link ___ page to another page rather than just writing it out, even though it seems like it takes more time, ChatGPT will usually complete all the steps necessary so you don’t get errors by missing certain things like syntax. The only downfall of this is that if you aren’t specific enough about what you want the code to execute, it gives something similar but not quite the same, which can lead to more issues for you to fix than what you began with. 

Documenting code
AI has been super useful for code documentation, especially in our final project as it defines everything in the code. Sometimes when you look at multiple files amongst multiple people who are all actively making edits and branches, it can get confusing really quickly so having documentation helps, and most of the time, if you copy paste an error or want chat to fix your file, it’ll automatically do it for you which is nice. Instead of going through everything line by line and commenting out what it does, AI does it in like 30 seconds which is great, and also helps you to understand your own code and makes it easier for people looking at it to understand as well. 

Quality assurance I
I personally love using AI for quality assurance because it makes debugging so much quicker and easier. I will actually usually use Copilot for certain errors because it’ll auto fix the small ESLint ones (like missing a semi colon or brackets) in your file but for multiple errors, ChatGPT can identify, and will usually send your fixed code back to you. I mentioned this above but I’ll usually ask, “can you fix the syntax?” or “why might this be making my website break?” or “can you fix the imports on this?” and it has never really failed me unless the issue was deeper, like the time I was trying to run testcafe in the same terminal as the regular site and it crashed (lol)

Impact on Learning and Understanding:
I really enjoyed that AI usage in this class was supported because it has been a tool that I’ve used in almost every class. I know it’s controversial, and some people may think it “dumbs them down” but if you’re allowing it to dumb you down, or using it as an assistant versus a learning tool then that’s the issue, not AI itself. AI has been great at allowing me to learn and grow into my passion for Computer Science and has alleviated a lot of the stress that comes with errors and learning new frameworks and platforms. I believe it has enhanced my understanding of software engineering concepts due to the quick accessibility and ability to ask it virtually anything, which I think at this point is far better than googling because it condenses pre-existing information from multiple sources into one area. I’m able to better comprehend and understand how to work through my errors, now know specific UI techniques, and can properly identify requirements and have a good understanding of what I need to add, due to ChatGPT’s thoroughness in explaining and adding comments to the code without asking so I can further understand what the program is doing. 

Practical Applications:
AI coupled with Machine Learning has literally made self driving cars. Companies like Tesla, Waymo, and Uber have leveraged AI algorithms to analyze vast amounts of sensor data, such as images, radar, and lidar, in real-time to make decisions about steering, acceleration, and braking. These AI-driven systems have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in navigating complex environments, avoiding obstacles, and adhering to traffic rules, thereby revolutionizing the world of transportation and paving the way for safer, more efficient mobility solutions.Additionally, in an article titled “Can AI solve cancer’s diagnostic woes?” by Benjamin Plackett at CNN, delves into physician Stephen Hughes, a senior lecturer at Anglia Ruskin University’s Medical Technology Research Centre and his team of medical students who are aiming to “..develop an AI model that uses only data from the UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), an official advisory body that reviews new health-care technologies for the National Health Service and publishes data and official advice. The algorithm is trained on data and acts as a patient avatar, which medical students can practice taking medical notes from.” Hughes hopes it will go on to do much more stating that,  “..we could extend this to cancer if it’s successful,” he says.


Challenges and Opportunities:
Sometimes it doesn’t do what you ask but that is mainly user error of not being specific enough. For example, if I said “add an eye icon to the password box” it might generate a random and unwanted picture in a random box, whereas if you say “implement a function that protects the users inputted password by allowing them to toggle between seeing their password and covering it with bullet points. Import and Add a black bootstrap eye icon to the right furthest side of the password text box within its own box of 2px to allow users to click their password to be shown or hidden” will get you a lot closer, if not exactly where you want to be with your code. Another thing that was challenging was that sometimes I had an error in one file that was due to an error such as a naming convention in another file and it can be difficult to organize and ask chatgpt to identify errors. I remember having to paste each file one by one before I could actually prompt it with a question, and even at that, I noticed it tends to get confused. When I had issues with my testcafe testing, it was editing the wrong file because I overloaded it with information and it just did what it thought I wanted. You also have to be really diligent about what you’re copy pasting because sometimes it does generate the wrong code or wrong solution to what you need and if you’re adding that to the file and it keeps breaking, you’ll have to keep going back and forth between old and new copies of your code to prevent further issues, if that makes sense. 

 Comparative Analysis:
In traditional teaching, engagement relies on lectures and in-person interactions, while AI-enhanced approaches offer personalized learning experiences and real-time feedback. Knowledge retention in traditional methods varies, whereas AI employs adaptive techniques like spaced repetition to enhance retention. Traditional teaching includes practical activities, while AI provides virtual labs and coding challenges for skill development. Overall, AI-enhanced approaches offer more personalized, interactive, and effective learning experiences in software engineering education compared to traditional methods.

Future Considerations:
The future role of AI in software engineering education holds immense potential for transforming the learning environment, but it also presents significant challenges and opportunities for improvement. Advancements in AI technology are likely to lead to more personalized and adaptive learning experiences, where AI-powered systems can tailor content, assessments, and feedback to individual student needs and learning styles. Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) technologies could further enhance practical skill development by offering immersive learning environments and simulated projects. Additionally, AI-driven tools such as code assistants and automated grading systems have the potential to streamline the grading process, provide instant feedback, and assist students in writing high-quality code. However, it is difficult to trust AI at times because of its inaccuracy at times which can be scary for big projects like Waymo and Cancer research where you don’t want there to be any issues. If something were to be wrong, or say perhaps, AI misdiagnoses a patient, that is detrimental to the patient, towards AI implementors, and practically a law suit waiting to happen. Same thing for Waymo, one wrong move and it is extremely easy for passengers to sue the company for its usage of AI/ML.



Conclusion:
I think it’s a great learning tool to be able to use and I more than likely wouldn’t have passed the class without it. When you’re learning so many concepts rapidly, it is easy to become overwhelmed and frustrated but AI makes that a lot easier as it can become a mentor, helper, debugger, teacher whenever you need it. Literally, 24/7. It also feels nice to feel encouraged using AI after every other professor regards it as cheating and then you begin to feel guilty for using it, even if you’re using it as a tool, not just to plagiarize it. When you prompt it correctly or at least specifically, it does a really great job at making coding a lot quicker for you. Even just solving errors, a lot of them can be worked out through AI, as long as you’re describing the error correctly and not being brief or lazy about it, by saying “fix this” etc. Also, I know for me specifically, I don’t have a lot of experience with UI design so without having AI accessible, I would’ve been a lot more stressed on the WODs and our final project. Having the option of using it and being able to use it without penalization is wonderful and has made me feel comfortable doing my assignments and hasn’t made me feel stressed out or worried about not being able to reach the professor or TA because I can just ask AI for help. If any suggestions, I would probably take the time to use one of the lecture days to give a debugging problem where students need to use chatGPT or AI to work through them, as that would be similar to having a WOD issue that you need to fix, but don’t know how you can be specific to AI. I think this alone would help a lot of people feel more comfortable using AI and likely lead to the success of many for the WODs. 
